Will not King Richard letme speak with him?
No, my good lord.
Therefore, be patient.
Hastings and Edward'schildren,
Grey and Rivers, holy KingHenry,
and thy fair son Edward,Vaughan,
and all that hathmiscarried
by underhand, corruptedfoul injustice,
if that your moody,discontented souls
do through the cloudsbehold this present hour,
even for revenge, mock mydestruction.
This is All Souls' Day,fellow, is it not?
It is.
Why, then, All Souls' Dayis my body's doomsday.
This is the day which inKing Edward's time
I wished might fall on me
when I was found false tohis children and hiswife's allies.
This is the day wherein Iwished to fall
by the false faith of himwhom most I trusted.
This, this All Souls' Day
to my fearful soul is thedetermined respite of mywrongs.
That high All-Seer which Idallied with
hath turned my feignedprayer on my head
and given in earnest whatI begged in jest.
Thus doth he force theswords of wicked men
to turn their own pointsin their masters' bosoms.
Thus Margaret's cursefalls heavy on my neck.
"When he," quoth she,
"shall split thy heartwith sorrow,
remember Margaret was aprophetess."
Come, Ratcliffe.
Lead me to the block ofshame.
Wrong hath but wrong
and blame the due ofblame.
Fellows in arms and mymost loving friends,
bruised underneath theyoke of tyranny,
thus far into the bowelsof the land
have we marched on withoutimpediment.
And here receive we fromour father, Stanley,
lines of fair comfort andencouragement.
The wretched, bloody, andusurping boar
that spoiled your summerfields and fruitful vines,
swills your warm bloodlike wash
and makes his trough inyour emboweled bosoms--
this foul swine is now evenin the center of this isle
near to the town ofLeicester, as we learn.
From Tamworth thither isbut one day's march.
In God's name, cheerly on,courageous friends,
to reap the harvest ofperpetual peace
by this one bloody trialof sharp war.
Every man's conscience isa thousand men
to fight against thisguilty homicide.
I doubt not but hisfriends will turn to us.
He hath no friends butwhat are friends for fear,
which in his dearest needwill fly from him.
All for our vantage.
Then in God's name, march.
True hope is swift andflies with swallow's wings.
Kings it makes gods andmeaner creatures kings.
Here pitch our tent, evenhere in Bosworth Field.
My Lord of Surrey, whylook you so sad?
My heart is ten timeslighter than my looks.
My Lord of Norfolk.
Here, most gracious liege.
Norfolk, we must haveknocks. Huh, must we not?
We must both give andtake, my loving lord.
Up with my tent!
Here will I lie tonight.
But where tomorrow?
Well, all's one for that.
Who hath descried thenumber of the traitors?
Six or seven thousand istheir utmost power.
Why, our battalion treblesthat account.
Besides, the king's nameis a tower of strength
which they upon theadverse faction want.
Up with the tent!
Come, noble gentlemen.
Let us survey the vantageof the ground.
Call for some men of sounddirection.
Let's lack no discipline,make no delay.
For, lords, tomorrow is abusy day.
The weary sun hath made agolden set,
and by the bright track ofhis fiery car
gives token of a goodlyday tomorrow.
Sir William Brandon, youshall bear my standard.
Give me some ink and paperin my tent.
I'll draw the form andmodel of our battle.
Limit each leader to hisseveral charge,
and part in just proportionour small power.
My Lord of Dorset, you,Sir William Brandon,
and you, Sir WalterHerbert, stay with me.
The Earl of Pembroke keepshis regiment.
Good Captain Blunt, bearmy good night to him,
and by the second hour inthe morning,
desire the earl to see mein my tent.
Yet one thing more, goodCaptain, do for me.
Where is Lord Stanleyquartered?
Do you know?
Unless I have mista'en hiscolors much,
which well I am assured Ihave not done,
his regiment lies half amile at least
south from the mightypower of the king.
If without peril it bepossible, sweet Blunt,
make some good means tospeak with him,
and give him from me thismost needful note.
Upon my life, my lord,I'll undertake it.
So God give you quiet resttonight.
Good night, good CaptainBlunt.
Come, gentlemen.
Let us consult upontomorrow's business.
Into my tent.
The dew is raw and cold.
What is't o'clock?
It's suppertime, my lord.
It's nine o'clock.
I will not sup tonight.
Give me some ink andpaper.
What, is my armor easierthan it was?
It is, my liege; and allthings are in readiness.
Good Norfolk.
Hie thee to thy charge.
Use careful watch. Choosetrusty sentinels.
I go, my lord.
Stir with the larktomorrow, gentle Norfolk.
I warrant you, my lord.
Catesby.
My lord?
Send out a pursuivant atarms to Stanley's regiment.
Bid him bring his powerbefore sunrising,
lest his son George
fall into the blind caveof eternal night.
Fill me a bowl of wine.
Give me a watch!
Saddle white Surrey forthe field tomorrow.
Look that my staves besound and not too heavy.
Ratcliffe.
My lord.
Sawest thou the melancholyLord Northumberland?
Thomas the Earl of Surreyand himself,
much about cock-shut time,from troop to troop
went through the army,cheering up the soldiers.
So I am satisfied.
Give me a bowl of wine.
I have not that alacrityof spirit
nor cheer of mind that Iwas wont to have.
Set it down.
Is ink and paper ready?
It is, my lord.
Bid my guard watch.
Leave me.
Ratcliffe.
About the mid of night,
come to my tent and helpto arm me.
Leave me, I say.
Fortune and victory sit onthy helm.
All comfort that the darknight can afford
be to thy person, noblefather-in-law.
Tell me, how fares ourloving mother?
I, by attorney, bless theefrom thy mother,
who prays continually forRichmond's good.
So much for that.
The silent hours steal on,
and flaky darkness breakswithin the east.
In brief, for so theseason bids us be,
prepare thy battle earlyin the morning,
and put thy fortune to thearbitraments
of bloody strokes andmortal-staring war.
I, as I may-- that which Iwould I cannot--
with best advantage willdeceive the time
and aid thee in thisdoubtful shock of arms.
But on thy side, I may notbe too forward
lest, being seen, thybrother, tender George,
be executed in hisfather's sight.
Farewell.
The leisure and thefearful time
cuts off the ceremoniousvows of love
which so long-sunderedfriends should dwell upon.
God give us leisure forthese rites of love.
Once more, adieu.
Be valiant, and speedwell.
Good lords, conduct him tohis regiment.
I'll strive with troubledthoughts to take a nap,
lest leaden slumber peiseme down tomorrow,
when I should mount withwings of victory.
Once more, good night,kind lords and gentlemen.
O Thou, whose captain Iaccount myself,
look on my forces with agracious eye.
Put in their hands thybruising irons of wrath,
that they may crush downwith a heavy fall
the usurping helmets ofour adversaries.
Make us thy ministers ofchastisement,
that we may praise thee inthe victory.
To thee I do commend mywatchful soul,
ere I let fall the windowsof mine eyes.
Sleeping and waking, O,defend me still.
My prayers on the adverseparty fight.
And there the little soulsof Edward's children
whisper the spirits ofthine enemies
and promise them successand victory.
Bloody thou art.
Bloody will be thy end.
Shame serves thy life anddoth thy death attend.
Let me sit heavy on thysoul tomorrow.
Think how thou stabbest me
in my prime of youth atTewksbury.
Despair, therefore, anddie.
Be cheerful, Richmond,
for the wronged souls ofbutchered princes
fight in thy behalf.
King Henry's issue,Richmond, comforts thee.
When I was mortal, myanointed body
by thee was punched fullof deadly holes.
Think on the Tower and me.
Despair, and die.
Harry the Sixth bids theedespair, and die.
Virtuous and holy, be thouconqueror.
Harry, that prophesiedthou shouldst be king,
doth comfort thee in thysleep.
Live, and flourish.
Let me sit heavy on thysoul tomorrow.
I, that was washed todeath with fulsome wine,
poor Clarence, by thyguile betrayed to death.
Tomorrow in the battle,think on me,
and fall thy edgelesssword.
Despair, and die.
Thou offspring of thehouse of Lancaster,
the wronged heirs of York,do pray for thee.
Good angels guard thybattle.
Live, and flourish.
Let me sit heavy on thysoul tomorrow:
Rivers, that died atPomfret.
Despair, and die.
Think upon Grey, and letthy soul despair.
Think upon Vaughan,
and with guilty fear, letfall thy lance.
Despair, and die.
Awake, and think ourwrongs
in Richard's bosom willconquer him.
Awake, and win the day.
Bloody and guilty,guiltily awake,
and in a bloody battle,end thy days.
Think on Lord Hastings.
Despair, and die.
Quiet, untroubled soul,awake, awake.
Arm, fight, and conquer,for fair England's sake.
Dream on thy cousins,smothered in the Tower.
Let us be led within thybosom, Richard,
and weigh thee down toruin, shame, and death.
Thy nephews' souls bidthee despair and die.
Sleep, Richmond.
Sleep in peace, and wakein joy.
Good angels guard theefrom the boar's annoy.
Live, and beget a happyrace of kings.
Edward's unhappy sons dobid thee flourish.
Richard, thy wife,
that wretched Anne, thywife,
that never slept a quiethour with thee,
now fills thy sleep withperturbations.
Tomorrow in the battle,think on me,
and fall thy edgelesssword.
Despair, and die.
Thou quiet soul, sleepthou a quiet sleep.
Dream of success and happyvictory.
Thy adversary's wife dothpray for thee.
The first was I thathelped thee to the crown.
The last was I that feltthy tyranny.
O, in the battle, think ofBuckingham.
Die in terror of thyguiltiness.
Dream on.
Dream on of bloody deedsand death.
Fainting, despair.
Despairing, yield thybreath.
I died for hope ere Icould lend thee aid.
But cheer thy heart, andbe thou not dismayed.
God and good angels fighton Richmond's side.
And Richard fall, inheight of all his pride.
Give me another horse!
Bind up my wounds!
Have mercy, Jesu.
Soft, I did but dream.
Coward conscience, howdost thou afflict me.
The lights burn blue.
'Tis now dead midnight.
Cold, fearful drops standon my trembling flesh.
What do I fear?
Myself?
There's none else by.
Richard loves Richard.
That is I and I.
Is there a murderer here?
No. Yes, I am.
Then fly.
What, from myself?
Great reason why, lest Irevenge.
What, myself upon myself?
Alack, I love myself.
Wherefore?
For any good that I myselfhave done unto myself?
O, no! Alas, I rather hatemyself
for hateful deedscommitted by myself.
I am a villain.
Yet I lie. I am not.
Fool, of thyself speakwell.
Fool, do not flatter!
My conscience hath athousand several tongues,
and every tongue brings ina several tale,
and every tale condemns mefor a villain.
Perjury, perjury, in thehighest degree.
Murder, stern murder, inthe direst degree.
All several sins, all usedin each degree,
throng to the bar, cryingall, "Guilty, guilty."
I shall despair.
There is no creature lovesme.
And if I die, no soul willpity me.
And wherefore should they,
since that I myself find inmyself no pity to myself?
Methought the souls of allthat I'd murdered came tomy tent,
and every one did threattomorrow's vengeance
on the head of Richard.
My lord?
'Zounds. Who is there?
Ratcliffe, my lord.
'Tis I.
The early village cock
hath twice done salutationto the morn.
Your friends are up andbuckle on their armor.
O Ratcliffe, I havedreamed a fearful dream.
What thinkest thou?
Will our friends prove alltrue?
No doubt, my lord.
O Ratcliffe, I fear.
I fear.
Nay, good my lord.
Be not afraid of shadows.
By the apostle Paul,shadows tonight
have struck more terror tothe soul of Richard
than can the substance ofa thousand soldiers
armed in proof and led byshallow Richmond.
'Tis not yet near day.
Come, go with me.
Under our tents, I'll playthe eavesdropper,
to see if any mean toshrink from me.
Good morrow, my lord.
Oh.
Cry mercy, lords andwatchful gentlemen,
that you have ta'en atardy sluggard here.
How have you slept, mylord?
The sweetest sleep andfairest-boding dreams
that ever entered in adrowsy head
have I since yourdeparture had, my lords.
Methought their soulswhose bodies Richardmurdered
came to my tent and criedon victory.
I promise you, my soul isvery jocund
in the remembrance of sofair a dream.
How far into the morningis it, lords?
Upon the stroke of four.
Why, then, 'tis time toarm and give direction.
More than I have said,loving countrymen,
the leisure andenforcement of the timeforbids to dwell upon.
Yet remember this:
God and our good causefight upon our side.
The prayers of holy saintsand wronged souls,
like high-reared bulwarks,stand before our faces,
Richard except.
Those whom we fightagainst
had rather have us winthan him they follow.
For what is he theyfollow?
Truly, gentlemen, a bloodytyrant and a homicide,
one raised in blood andone in blood established,
one that made means tocome by what he hath
and slaughtered those thatwere the means to help him.
A base, foul stone,
made precious by the foilof England's chair,
where he is falsely set.
One that hath ever beenGod's enemy.
Then, if you fight againstGod's enemy,
God will in justice wardyou as his soldiers.
If you do sweat to put atyrant down,
you sleep in peace, thetyrant being slain.
If you do fight againstyour country's foes,
your country's fat shallpay your pains the hire.
If you do fight insafeguard of your wives,
your wives shall welcomehome the conquerors.
If you do free yourchildren from the sword,
your children's childrenquits it in your age.
Then, in the name of Godand all these rights,
advance your standards;draw your willing swords.
For me, the ransom of mybold attempt
shall be this cold corpseon the earth's cold face.
But if I thrive, the gainof my attempt
the least of you shallshare his part thereof.
Sound drums and trumpetsboldly and cheerfully.
God and Saint George.
Richmond and victory!
And what saidNorthumberland as touchingRichmond?
That he was never trainedup in arms.
He said the truth.
And what said Surrey then?
He smiled and said, "Thebetter for our purpose."
He was in the right.
And so indeed it is.
Ten the clock there.
Give me a calendar.
Who saw the sun today?
Not I, my lord.
Then he disdains to shine,
for by the book, he shouldhave braved the east anhour ago.
A black day will it be tosomebody.
Ratcliffe.
My lord?
The sun will not be seentoday.
The sky doth frown andlour upon our army.
I would these dewy tearswere from the ground.
Not shine today.
Why, what is that to memore than to Richmond?
For the selfsame Heaventhat frowns on me
looks sadly upon him.
Arm! Arm, my lord!
The foe vaunts in thefield.
Come! Bustle, bustle.
Caparison my horse.
Call up Lord Stanley; bidhim bring his power.
I will lead forth mysoldiers to the plain,
and thus my battle shallbe ordered:
My forward shall be drawnout all at length,
consisting equally ofhorse and foot.
Our archers shall beplaced in the midst.
John, Duke of Norfolk,Thomas, Earl of Surrey
shall have the leading ofthis foot and horse.
They thus directed, we willfollow in the main battle,
whose puissance on eitherside
shall be well winged withour chiefest horse.
This, and Saint George toboot.
What think'st thou,Norfolk?
A good direction, warlikesovereign.
This I found on my tentthis morning.
"Jockey of Norfolk, be notso bold,
for Dickon, thy master, isbought and sold."
A thing devised by theenemy.
Go, gentleman, every manunto his charge.
Let not our babblingdreams affright our souls.
Conscience is but a wordthat cowards use,
devised at first to keepthe strong in awe.
Our strong arms be ourconscience, swords our law.
March on; join bravely.
Let us to it pell-mell,
if not to heaven, thenhand in hand to Hell.
What shall I say more thanI have inferred?
Remember whom you are tocope withal:
a sort of vagabonds,rascals, and runaways,
a scum of Bretons and baselackey peasants,
whom their o'ercloyedcountry vomits forth
to desperate adventuresand assured destruction.
You sleeping safe, theybring to you unrest.
You having lands and blestwith beauteous wives,
they would restrain theone, disdain the other.
And who doth lead them buta paltry fellow,
a milksop, one that neverin his life
felt so much cold asovershoes in snow?
Let's whip these stragglerso'er the seas again.
Lash hence theseoverweening rags of France,
these famished beggars,weary of their lives,
who, but for dreaming onthis fond exploit,
for want of means, poorrats, had hanged themselves.
If we be conquered, letmen conquer us,
and not these bastardBretons,
whom our fathers have intheir own lands
beaten, bobbed, andthumped,
and in record, left themthe heirs of shame.
Shall these enjoy ourlands?
Lie with our wives?
Ravish our daughters?
No!
Hark. I hear their drum.
Fight, gentlemen ofEngland.
Fight, bold yeomen.
Draw, archers, draw yourarrows to the head.
Spur your proud horseshard, and ride in blood.
Amaze the welkin with yourbroken staves.
What says Lord Stanley?Will he bring his power?
My lord, he doth deny tocome.
Off with his son George'shead!
My lord, the enemy is pastthe marsh!
After the battle, letGeorge Stanley die.
A thousand hearts aregreat within my bosom.
Advance our standards.
Set upon our foes.
Our ancient word ofcourage, fair Saint George,
inspire us with the spleenof fiery dragons.
Upon them!
Victory sits on our helms!
Rescue.
My Lord of Norfolk,rescue, rescue!
The king enacts morewonders than a man,
daring an opposite toevery danger.
His horse is slain, andall on foot he fights,
seeking for Richmond inthe throat of death!
Rescue, fair lord, or elsethe day is lost!
A horse! A horse! Mykingdom for a horse!
Withdraw, my lord.
I'll help you to a horse.
Slave!
I'll set my life upon acast,
and I will stand thehazard of the die.
I think there be sixRichmonds in the field.
Five have I slain todayinstead of him.
A horse! A horse!
My kingdom for a horse!
Richard!
For Richmond!
Richmond!
God and your arms bepraised, victorious friends.
The day is ours.
The bloody dog is dead.
Courageous Richmond, wellhast thou acquit thee.
Lo, here, thislong-usurped royalty.
Wear it, enjoy it, andmake much of it.
Great God of Heaven, sayAmen to all.
But, tell me, is youngGeorge Stanley living?
He is, my lord, and safein Leicester town,
whither, if it please you,we will now withdraw us.
Proclaim a pardon to thesoldiers fled
that in submission willreturn to us.
And then, as we have ta'enthe sacrament,
we will unite the whiterose and the red.
Smile, Heaven, upon thisfair conjunction
that long have frownedupon their enmity.
What traitor hears me andsays not Amen?
Amen.
England hath long been madand scarred herself.
The brother blindly shedthe brother's blood,
the father rashlyslaughtered his own son,
the son, compelled, beenbutcher to the sire.
All this divided York andLancaster,
delighted in their diredivision.
O, now let Richmond andElizabeth,
the true succeeders ofeach royal house,
by God's fair ordinanceconjoin together.
And let their heirs, God,if thy will be so,
enrich the time to comewith smooth-faced peace,
with smiling plenty, andfair prosperous days.
Abate the edge oftraitors, gracious Lord,
that would reduce thesebloody days again
and make poor England weepin streams of blood.
Let them not live to tastethis land's increase
that would with treason woundthis fair land's peace.
Now civil wounds arestopped.
Peace lives again.
That she may long livehere, God say amen!